Scientific Study

The scientific study includes scientific facts, theories, models, experiments and physical situations. It studies various objects in nature in a planned and organized way. It also logically investigates the various phenomena based on the scientific method and empirical or measurable evidence. Various causative factors have a role in different events and phenomena that have occurred in nature. The causative factor, characteristic, or trait that has a direct or indirect relationship with an event or a phenomenon is known as a variable.
1.1 Variables of scientific research
When we see a phenomenon or change, we are curious to know why it happens, what factors are involved, and how they have affected that event or phenomenon. Such curiosity helps us to predict the result of an action correctly. For instance, if we see a wilted potted plant in the garden, we want to know why is it wilted. Is it because of lack of water, overexposure to bright sun, or some other reasons? To find out the answer, we try to find the effects of keeping the plant in the shade or watering it or doing some other things. With the help of knowledge and experience obtained from such curiosity or interest, we can easily guess what could be the condition of the plant if we forget to water it or keep it in the shade on a hot day. Then we can take the necessary measures to save it.
For each incident or change, there is always cause and effect. In the aforementioned example, either lack of water or excessive heat of the sun is the causative factor whereas wilting is the effect. The effect depends on the causal factors. For example, the rigidity of the stein of a plant depends on the amount of water in it. Therefore, for the right estimation, it is essential to know the

relationship between the magnitude of the causative factor and the magnitude of the effect.
This relation can be established through experiments. The task of a scientist is to set up a relationship between various physical quantities and ultimately find out how nature works.

Activity 1.1
Title: Making catapult from a rubber band
Materials required: rubber band (about 5 cn1 long), a 15 cm long ruler, small pieces of paper (about 2cm length and 2 cm breadth) and measuring tape

Method
1. Trap the pieces of paper into a cylinder-like form and fold them in the middle. It functions as a projectile or bullet , for a catapult.
2. Hook the rubber band into two fingers of one hand (e.g., thumb and forefinger), as shown in n in the figure.
3. Hold the paper bullet within two segments of the rubber band and stretch the rubber band.
4. Ask your friend to measure the extension of the rubber band (distance from the fingers to the paper bullet). Make the distance 4cm.
5. Release the paper bullet. It will fly away from the catapult. Measure the distance covered by the paper bullet.
6. Note down the extension of the rubber band and the distance travelled by the paper bullet.
7. Now, stretch the rubber band 6 cn1and launch the paper bullet. Measure the distance travelled by the bullet. Repeat this for the
extension of 8 cm and 10 cm.

S.N. Extension of rubber band(cm) Distance travelled by the paper bullet (cm)
1. 4
2. 6
3. 8
4. 10

Scientific research involves changing the magnitude of one physical quantity and observing how this change brings changes in another physical quantity. For example: in the above experiment, we studied how the extension (stretch) of the rubber band affects the distance travelled by the paper bullet. Here, the extension of the rubber band and the distance covered by the bullet are both physical quantities and their magnitude are different in each experiment. Such physical quantities are called variables because their value or magni-tude varies each time. The elements (physical quantities) that change or may change in an experiment are called variables of the experiment or research. In the above experiment stretching of the rubber band and the distance covered by the paper bullet are the variables of that experiment. The thickness of the rubber band and the size of the paper bullet could also have been changed in that experiment. Therefore, these are also the variable of the research.
Each variable has a name and is represented by a symbol for ease of writing. The relation between variables is expressed in terms of a mathematical formula. For example: If the extension or stretch of rubber is denoted by 'e' and the distance travelled by the paper piece is denoted by 'x', the relation between them is x directly proportional to e.

Types of variables
Usually, variables are classified into three types: independent variable, dependent variable and controlled variable.

a. Independent variable
During a scientific experiment or research, the researcher manipulates or changes a variable in a particular amount and measures the changes in another variable. The change made by the experimenter or researcher is the causative factor and subsequent change in another variable is the effect.
In the experiment above, stretched rubber band throws the paper bullet. The extension of the rubber band is the causative factor and the distance travelled by the paper is the effect. The researcher or experimenter is free to decide the degree of extension of the rubber band. The variable which can be manipulated by a researcher is called the independent variable. In activity 1.1, the extension of the rubber band is the independent variable.
Causative factors related to the experiment are independent variables. For exan1ple, the amount of fertilizer,. sunlight and water can be the independent variables for the growth of a plant.
b. Dependent variable
In experin1ent 1.1, the researcher cannot tell the distance covered by the piece of paper directly because it depends on the amount of stretching of the rubber band. Such a variable is called a dependent variable. So dependent variable is the variable whose value depends upon the value of another variable and the experimenter cannot predict or determine its value directly. For example, in activity 1.1 the distance covered by the paper bullet is the dependent variable. Similarly, while observing the effect of sunlight on the growth and development of the plant. the an1ount of sunlight is the independent variable and the height or growth of the plant is the dependent variable.
c. Controlled variable
In some experiments or research, there may be more than two variables. Each variable influences the result of an experiment or research. Thus, it is not possible to determine which vitiable is responsible for the change in the results or findings. In such a situation, it is difficult to draw conclusion. The conclusion might even not be valid or reliable. Therefore, to make the finding of the experiment valid, reliable and accurate, variables other than the specified independent variable and dependent variable should be controlled so that they do not affect the result. Such variables which are taken into control throughout the experiment or research are known as the controlled variables.
In activity 1.1, the thickness of the rubber band and the size of the paper bullet should be kept the same throughout the experiment.
If different rubber bands are used at each activity, the result will not be valid. Hence, for this experiment, the thickness of the rubber band and the size of the paper bullet are the controlled variables. Similarly, while we are observing the effect of light on plant growth, all plants should be of uniform size at the beginning of the experiment. Air, water and manure supplied to these plants should also be kept uniform throughout the experiment. So, the initial size of plants, air, water, and manure supplied to them are the controlled variables. In the same way, if  we are studying the rate of a chemical reaction between the surface area of limestone and acid, the acid used each time should have the same concentration and the quantity and weight of limestone should also be kept the same. In this experiment, surface area is the independent variable, the rate of reaction is the dependent variable and the concentration of acid, quantity and weight of lin1estone are the controlled variables. Controlling such variables requires special arrangements while formulating the design of the experiment.
In Activity 1.1
Independent variable: extensionof rubber band
Dependent variable : distance travelled by paper bullet
Controlled variable : thickness of rubber band and size of the paper bullet

Other examples of the variable types mentioned above are listed in the table below:

S.N.
Subject of research
Independent variable (what I can change)
Dependent variable (What I observe)
Controlled variable (what I keep the same
1.
Relation of a rotating knob of a tap and the rate of flow of the water
Magnitude of rotation of knob (in degree)
Amount of the water flow per minute (in litre)
water pressure
2.
Relation of electricity and magnetism in a solenoid
Amount of electric cur-rent (in ampere)
Number of pins attracted by the electro-magnet
Number of turns in the solenoid, size of the pin
3.
Effect of heat on the solubility of sugar
Temperature of water (in degree Celsius)
Amount of completely dissolved sugar in water (in grams)
Amount of water (always 100 grams)
4.
The immediate effect of physical exercise on the heartbeat
Duration of physical exercise (in minutes)
Number of heartbeats
Type of physical exercise, the interval be-tween the end of exercise, and count of heartbeats

Things to be considered about variables
1. There should be only one independent variable in research or an experiment.
2. There should be only one dependent variable in research or an experiment.
3. Except for the specified independent variable and dependent variable, other variables should be controlled.
4. While expressing the relation between variables in an equation, usually, the dependent variable is written on the left side of the equation and the independent variable is written on the right side. Hence, the independent variable is sometimes called a right variable and the dependent variable is called the left variable. For example, if we study how the distance covered by a moving object varies with time, then the mathematical equation of their relationship will be s =vt. Where distance travelled (s) is the dependent variable, time (t) is the independent variable and speed (v) is the controlled va1:iable.
5. While plotting the relationship of variables in a graph, the dependent variable is always plotted on the y-axis or the vertical line and the independent variable is plotted on the horizontal line or the x-axis. Therefore, the dependent variable is sometimes called the vertical variable or they-variable and the independent variable is called the horizontal variable or the x-variable. Graph presentation always depicts how the change in the independent variable brings the change in the dependent variable.

1.2 Types of units
Physical quantities are measured in units. The units of all physical quantities can be divided into two types:
1. Funda1nental unit
2. Derived unit
Fundamental unit
The unit of measurement which has its independent existence or does not depend upon the other units and cannot be resolved into any simpler forms is called the fundamental unit. For example, the fundamental unit of mass is kilogram, the fundamental unit of time is second, and the fundamental unit of length is metre. In the SI system,
there are 7 fundamental units and they are listed below:
S.N.
Physical quantity
Fundamental unit
Symbol
1.
length
meter
m
2.
mass
kilogram
kg
3.
time
second
S
4.
temperature
kelvin
K
5.
luminous intensity
candela
cd
6.
electric current
ampere
A
7.
amount of substance
mole
mol

Derived unit
The unit of measurement which has no independent existence and is composed of two or more fundamental units is called a derived unit. For example, the unit of density is kg/m3  It consists of two fundamental units; kilogram and meter. Similarly, the unit of force is kgms^-2, where kilogram (kg), metre (m) and second (s) are the three fundamental units involved in it. It is difficult to say kgms-2 in daily use and hence, this combined form of units is given a simpler name, newton (N). Therefore, N = Kgms-2  Likewise, the unit of pressure is pascal (Pa). This unit is equal to kgm^-1s^2  In this way, units of many derived quantities are given a specific name. But in the case of some physical quantities, the combination of fundamental units in itself is in use, for example, unit of density is kgm^-3.There is no simpler name for it.

Quantity
Formula
Combination of base units according to the formula
Fundamental Units involved
Derived Unit

area
lxb
meter x meter
m^2
m^2

volume
l x b x h
meter x meter x meter
m^3
m^3

density
mass/volume
kg/m^3
kg/m^3

velocity
displacement/time
m/s
m/s
m/s

acceleration
velocity/tie
m/s²
m/s²
meter/second x second

force
mass x acceleration
kilogram x meter/second x second
kgm/s²
Newton (N)

pressure
force/aea
(kgm/s²) /meter²
kg/ms²
Pascal (Pa)

work
forcex distance
kgm/s²x meter
kgm²/s²
joule (J)

power
work time
kgm²/s²
kgm²/s

watt (W)
second
moment
force x distance
(kgm/s²) x meter
kgm²/s²
Nm

frequency
1
1
time
S
Hz

To find out the composition of derived unit which includes the fundamental units, analysis can be done based on the definition of the physical quantity. For example:
a) The unit of area is square metre
Analysis:	Area  = length x breadth
=mxm
= m2
Therefore, the unit of area is 1n2  This unit is formed from two fundamental units.
b) The unit of force is Newton (N)
Analysis: According to the definition of force, F = ma
The unit of mass (m) is kg and the unit of acceleration (a) is ms-2  Therefore, N = kgms-2  Hence kilogram, meter and second are the fundamental units and they are combined to form the unit of force
which is called newton.

Activity 1.2

Fi11d out the various units used to measure differe11f kinds of physi  cal quantities in your daily life. Classify these units into two groups; fu11dame11tal and derived units and fill up the table as give11 below in your note copy.

Fundamental units /Derived units

The difference between the fundamental unit and the derived unit is mentioned below:

Fundamental unit Derived unit
a)It does not depend upon other units. a)It depends upon the fundamental units.
b)There are seven fundamental units used till now. b)Many derived units areformed from seven fundamental units.

Analysis of unit wise equation
Various formulae and equations are obtained from the conclusion of scientific studies. The validity and uniformity of such formulae and equations can be checked by the analysis of units involved in such physical quantities. For the validation of an equation, units on both sides of an equation must be the same. Example,i:vhile performing the unit analysis of the equation: s=vxt, the fundamental unit of the quantity on the left-hand side of the equation ism and the fundamental unit of the quantity on the right-hand side of the equation is also ms^-1 X s = 1. Therefore, this equation is valid.
But, if someone claims s = v/t, then by performing the unit analysis, the fundamental unit of the quantity on the left-hand side ism but the fundamental unit of the quantity on the right-hand side is ms-1/s or ms-2  Hence the unit of physical quantity on the left-hand side of the equation is not equal with the unit of physical quantity on the right-hand side. So, the equations = v/t is invalid or wrong.
Addition and subtraction of physical quantities are possible if they have the same composition of fundamental units. Example: u+v is possible because both of them have the same unit, ms-1. Similarly, s - at2 is also possible because the fundamental unit of s is m and the fundamental unit of at2 is also 111; when simplified. But, s+at is not possible because the unit of s (distance covered) is 111 and the fundamental unit of atis ms-1. Thus, they cannot be added due to dissimilarity in the composition of fundamental units.
Example: Test the validity of the equation given below by unit analysis.
(i)	v2 = u 2+2as
(i) s = ut+ 1/2 a2t
Now,
(i) v2 = u2+2as

In the above equation, there is uniformity in the unit of physical quantity on either side. So, this is a valid equation.
(ii) s = ut+	1/2 a2t
m = ms^-1 X s + (ms^-2)^2 X s 
m = m + m^2s^-3
In the equation given above, there is no similarity in the base units of the physical quantities on either side. So, this equation is not valid.
Analysis of units is required to prove the accuracy of an equation, to find out the inter-relation of physical quantities and for the conversion of units of various measuren1ent systems.

Exercise
1. Choose the correct options for the following questions.
a. Which of the following is a fundamental unit?
i. newton
ii. pascal
iii. kilogram
iv. joule
b. Which of the following physical quantities has the unit ms-¹?
i. acceleration
ii. velocity
iii. force
iv. density
C. Which of the following is a derived unit?
i. candela
ii. ampere
iii. joule
iv. kelvin
d. Which of the following units denote newton?
i. kgms-2
ii. kgm²s-2
iii. kgm-2s-2
iv. kgms-1

2. Give reason:
a. Joule is the derived unit of work.
b. Some variables should be controlled while performing an experiment.
C. v2 ut is not a valid relation.

3. Differentiate between:
a. Independent variable and dependent variable
b. Write the SI units of mass, temperature, energy, and density.
C. How is the validity of an equation checked? Write an example.
d. Mention the fundamental units involved in the unit of pressure.
e. Find out the fundamental units involved in the given derived unit.
i. newton (N)
ii. watt (W)
iii. joule (J)
iv. pascal (Pa)
f. Niva claimed that an alternative formula for power is P = m * v ^ 2 and the formula of pressure; P=mv/A. Check the validity of given formulae by the analysis of units.
g. Describe the independent variable, dependent variable and controlled variable with a suitable example of each.
h. Karma connected a dry cell to a bulb using a few pieces of wire and lit the bulb. He was curious to know how the thick-ness of the used wire affects the life span of a dry cell. In this test or experiment, find out the independent variable, dependent variable and controlled variable.
i.Chandani wanted to investigate the effects of substances mixed with the soil on plant growth. She decided to mix lime, urea fertilizer, common salt, and compost manure in the soil. Then she brought a bucket of soil from a nearby field and sieved it. She put that soil equally into 12 uniform-sized pots. Then she mixed two spoons of salt in every three pots, two spoons of urea fertilizer in each of the next three pots, two spoons of table salt in each of the next three pots, and finally, two spoons of compost fertilizer in each of the remaining three pots. She then planted similar seeds of the same plant in every pot and placed them all in a sunny place in the house. She watered all the pots every day. After the plants grew, she measured the height of each plant daily and kept a record.
i. Identify the independent variable, dependent variable and controlled variable in Chandani's experiment.
ii. Why did Chandani use 3 pots for each experiment?
j. Subodh wanted to find out how the colour of an object affects its ability to hold heat. For that, he took four conical flasks and coated the first flask with black coloured enamel, the second with white enamel, the third with green enamel and the fourth with red enamel. Then, he filled all the flasks with water, closed the mouth of each flask tightly with cork and then kept them in the sun. After some time he measured the temperature of water in each flask with the help of a thermometer and noted the readings.
Identify the independent variable and dependent variable in Subodh's experiment. Which variables should be controlled by Subodh?
k. Manisha wanted to test the eating habits of her dog. She decided to study how the amount of food and the time of giving food affects the speed at which the dog ate. What is wrong with the design of Manisha's experiment and how can she correct it?
l. Prove that: Unit of electric resistance ohm (Ω) = kgm2s-3A-2

Classification of Living Beings
fig 2.1
i. According to five kingdom classification, which kingdom do these organisms belong to?
ii. How are bacteria and Euglena different from each other?
iii. What could be the similarities and dissimilarities between a mushroom and a fern?
iv. On what basis, are ferns and frogs placed in plant and animal kingdom, respectively?
Environment is a home for microscopic organisms to giant organisms like bluewhale, elephant, banyan, peepal, etc. On the basis of structure of cell, body structure, mode of nutrition, presence or absence of cell wall etc., Robert Harding Whittaker classified these organisms into the five kingdoms. Among them, we already discussed about kingdoms monera, protista and fungi in grade nine. Here, lets recall the main characteristics of the organisms that belong to those three kingdoms. 
All the organisms that belong to monera have prokaryotic cell. Protista includes unicellular organisms whereas fungus consists of saprotrophic organisms that have cell wall but no chlorophyll.

Among the organisms given above, bacteria have prokaryotic cell. Euglena is a unicellular organism. Mushroom does not have chlorophyll. And it decomposes dead and decaying plants to derive its food. Fern is an autotroph because of the presence of chlorophyll but frogs are heterotrophs because they lack chlorophyll.

Organism
Prokaryotes
Eukaryotes
Unicellular
Unicellular
Multicellular
i Monera
ii Protista
with cell wall
without cell wall
Heterotrophic Nutrition
Autotrophic Nutrition
v Animalia
iii Fungi
iv Plantae
Figure 2.2 Five kingdom classification system

2.1 Plantae Kingdom

Look at the picture below and discuss the following questions:

Moss
Fern
Chlamydomonas
Pea
Maize
Pinus
Figure 2.3

i. What are the similarities in the organisms shown in the picture?
ii. In which kingdom do they belong?
iii. What are the main features of the kingdom they belong to?
iv. What are the differences between moss and fern?
Chlamydomonas, moss, fern, pine, pea, maize have green pigments called chlorophyll in their body. They belong to kingdom plantae that includes unicellular as well as multicellular green plants. Their cell wall is made up of cellulose. They are autotrophs. Some of these plants are flowering and some are non-flowering. On the basis of their structure, these plants are classified into three divisions: Algae, Bryophyta and Trachaeophyta.

1. Algae
Activity 2.1 The study of Algae
Objective: To identify the characteristics of algae
Materials required: Bottle, dropper, glass slide, cover slips, and compound microscope
Method
i. Collect water with algae in a bottle from a nearby pond or a damp marshy place.
ii. Put a drop of water along with algae on the slide with the help of dropper.
iii. Cover the algae with a cover slip.
iv. Observe the slide undermicroscope.
V. After observing, draw a diagram to show the structure of the algae.
vi. Based on the observation, discuss the characteristics of the algae.
Conclusion

Observe the given picture and identify their characteristics.
Spirogyra
Volvox
Fucus
Figure 2.4

In plants -Spirogyra, Volvox, Fucus etc. shown in the picture, root sten1 and leaf cannot be differentiated. Their plant body is called thallus. Their cells contain cell wall and chlorophyll. These plants belong to division algae. Characteristics of the plants under this division are as follow:
a. They are either unicellular or n1ulticellular.
b. They are autotrophs due to the presence of chlorophyll. They prepare and store food in the forn1 of starch.
c. Their cell wall is con1posed of cellulose.
d. They reproduce both sexually and asexually.
e. These plants are found in pond, river, sea and 1narshy places.
Example: Chlamydomonas, Volvox, Spirogyra, Ulothrix, Fucus etc.

2. Bryophyta
Activity 2.2 Observation of the 1noss
Objective: To identify the characteristics of bryophyta.
Materials required: moss, needle, chart paper
Metl1od
i. Take a n1oss plant.
ii. Observe its various parts and identify them.
iii. Note its features based on the observation.
iv. Draw its neat diagram on a chart paper based on observation.
V. Browse the internet and find out its other characteristics.
vi. Present the characteristics of bryophyta in your class on the basis of internet research and direct observation of the moss.
vii. Based on the discussion, make a list of characteristics of bryophyta.
Conclusion

Look at the picture below and identify their characteristics.
Marchantia
Moss
Riccia
Figure 2.5
Plants such as Marchantia, moss, Riccia shown in the picture are more developed than algae. They are green plants. Plant body of Marchantia is thallus but plant body of moss is differentiated into rhizoid, stem, and simple leaf. These plants are found in moist and shady places. Plants under bryophyta need water for fertilization. So, they are also called amphibian plants. General characteristics of plants under bryophyta are as follows:
a. They are multicellular plants.
b. They are autotrophs.
c. Plant body is either thallus or differentiated into rhizoid, stem and simple leaf.
d. They are found in moist and shady places.
e. These plants are dioecious and plant body is gametophyte. Male plant produces male gamete in antheridium. Female plant produces female gamete in archegonium. Hence, this phase is called gametophyte. The male gamete is released from antheridium andreaches thearchegonium through water, where it fuses with the ovum to form a zygote. Then, zygote germinates and develops into as porophyte. In this phase, the spore mother cell divides by meiosis to form haploid spores. This phase is called the sporophyte phase because spores are produced here.
f. The phenomenon in which sporophytic and gametophytic generation come one after another to complete life cycle of a plant is called alternation of generation. The gametophytic generation is dominant and independent in the life cycle of these plants.
g. They have no vascular tissue. So they grow upto few centimetres high or are found attached and spread on substratum.
Example: Marchantia, moss, Riccia, etc.

3. Tracheophyta
Observe the picture below and discuss their structure and characteristics
Fern
Cycas
Banana
Peepal
Figure 2.6
Plant body of fern, Cycas, banana, peepal etc. shown in the picture is differentiated into root, stem and leaf. They have xylem and phloem as vascular tissue which perform transportation of substances throughout the body.
So these plants are under the division tracheophyta. Division tracheophyta includes non-flowering fern plant, small herbs, shrubs to huge and developed plants. On the basis of structure, plants in division tracheophyta are classified into three subdivisions: pteridophyta, gymnosperm and angiosperm.

A. Pteridophyta
Activity 2.3 Observation of the fern
Objective: To identify the characteristics of fern
Materials required: fern plant, chart paper, gum, etc.
Method
i. Bring a rooted fern plant.
ii. Observe its root, stem and leaves thoroughly.
iii. Note down its characteristics based on observation.
iv. Draw a neat diagram of fern plant on chart paper on the basis of your observation.
V. Paste the chart paper on aboard and discuss its feature in the class.
vi. Based on the discussion, prepare a list of characteristics of fern plant

Conclusion
Fern
horse tail
clubmoss
Figure 2.7

Root, stem. and leaves are prominent in the plants like fern, clubnmoss, horse tail and these plants do not bear flower. They have feather like leaves. Generally, their stem. is in the form of rhizome which lies horizontally under the soil. General characteristics of the plants under the subdivision pteridophyta are 111entioned below:
a. They are found in moist and shady places.
b. They have no seed but plant body is differentiated into root stem and leaf. Leaf is feather like; stein is under-developed in the forn1 of rhizon1e and root is developed.
c. They have developed vascular tissue like xylem. and phloem.
d. These plants have numerous brown spots on the lower surface of leaves which are called sori (singular: sorus). Inside the sorus lies sporangiun1 (plural: sporangia) that produces spores. Some leaves may not contain sori. Leaf with sari is called sporophyll and that without sori is called tropophyll. Plant body is called sporophyte because it produce shaploid spores.
e. Spores fall on the ground by the rupture of sporangia which geminate into gan1etophytes named prothalli (sing., prothallus) under suitable condition. Gametophyte produces both male and female gametes.
f. Their life cycle also shows alternation of generation. Sporophytic phase is dominant and lasts longer.
Plants like Fern, fiddlehead fern, Ground gooseberry, Lycopodium, Selaginaella, Pteris etc. fall under this division.

B. Gymnosperm
Look at the pictures given below and discuss.
Pinus
Juniper
Cycas
Figure 2.8

i. Do these plants bear flower?
ii. Where can we find their seeds and what do they look like?
iii. How are their leaves different from leaves of other plants?
Plants such as Cycas, Juniper, Pinus etc. are kept under flowering plants but they bear cones instead of flowers. They have naked seeds without fruits. So these plants are kept in the sub-division gymnosperm. Following are the characteristics of the plants under the sub-division gymnosperm:
a. Incourse of evolution of plants, gymnosperms are the first plant to produce seed.
b. They bear cones instead of flowers. Male and female cones are separate. So they are unisexual. Pollination takes place through wind.
C. There is no ovary in cone and hence no fruits. Seed is naked.
d. Their leaves are elongated and needle like.
e. Stem is enclosed within thick bark.
f. Shape of these plants is inverted cone like and hence they are called coniferous plants.
g. The roots of these plants are spread far into the ground.
Example: Cycas, Pinus, Juniper, Himalayan yew, Himalayan cedar

C. Angiosperm
Plants such as soybean, bamboo, etc. are real flowering plants. They have seeds enclosed in fruit. Sothese plants are placed under subdivision angiosperm. General characteristics of plants kept under angiosperm are given below:
a. They are most advanced plants of kingdom plantae.
b. These plants are found everywhere in land and water.
C. They have well developed root, stem, leaf, flower and fruit.
d. They bear real flower and flower contains both ovary and ovule.
e. Some plants are bisexual and some are unisexual.
f. Pollination takes place through various medium such as wind, water, insects, animal.
g. These plants contain seeds inside the fruit.
Orange, maize, banana, paddy, soybean, water hyacinth, Lemna, Pistia, etc. belong to this subdivision.
On the basis of number of cotyledons present in their seeds, angiosperms are grouped into two classes- monocotyledon and dicotyledon.

a. Monocotyledon
Activity 2.4	Observation of the maize plant
Objective: To identify the characteristics of monocotyledonous plant
Materials required: maize plant, chart paper, gum
Method
i. Obtain a rooted maize plant.
ii. Observe the root, stem, leaf, flower, fruit, and seed of the plant thoroughly.
iii. Based on your observations, noted own the arrangement of veins in the leaf, the type of root, parts of the flower, and the characteristics of the seed.
iv. Draw a neat diagram of maize plant on chart paper.
V. Paste the chart paper on the board and discuss the plant's characteristics in class.
vi. On the basis of maize plant, you have studied, prepare a list of characteristics of monocotyledonous plant.

Conclusion
Paddy
Bamboo
Turmeric
Barley
Banana
Figure 2.10
The leaves of the plants shown in the picture are slender and elongated. Veins are arranged in parallel. The roots of the plants are all equal and arise from the same place. So these plants are kept in the monocotyledon class. General characteristics of plants under this class are mentioned below:
a. They have parallel venation in leaves.
b. They have fibrous root.
c. Usually, they have hollow stem. Nodes are prominent, at equal interval. From the node arise branch and leaf. The leaf base expands into a sheath covering the stem.
d. Vascular tissues are xylem and phloem scattered within the stem.
e. Floral parts are three or multiples of three in number.
f. They have seeds enclosed in fruit. Seed consists of only one cotyledon.
g. They are found both in land and water. Wheat, sugarcane, banana, barley, bamboo etc. belong to this class.

b. Dicotyledon
Activity 2.5 Observation of the gram
Objective: To identify the characteristics of dicotyledonous plant
Materials required: gram plant, soaked gram seed, chart paper, glue
Method
i. Take a few soaked gram seeds in a bowl.
ii. Take out a seed, remove its outer covering, and observe and note down the number of cotyledons in the seed.
iii. Bring a rooted gram plant. If you do not find one, look for a gram plant on the internet.
iv. Observe its roots, stems, leaves, flowers, fruits, and seeds.
v. Based on your observations, note the arrangement of veins in leaves, the type of roots, parts of the flower, and characteristics of the seeds.
vi. Draw a neat picture of gram plant on a chart paper based on your observations.
vii. Paste the chart paper on the board and discuss the characteristics of the gram plant in your class.
viii. On the basis of gram plant you have discussed, prepare a list of characteristics of dicotyledonous plants.

Conclusion
Mustard	
Soybean	
Orange	
Bean	Pea
Figure 2.11
Plants shown in the picture, such as mustard, pea, orange, soybean, and bean, have broad and flat leaves. There is a mid-rib from which many veins and veinlets arise forming a network throughout the leaf blade. They have a prominent main root from which small root branches arise. Their seeds contain two cotyledons. So they are placed in the class dicotyledon.
Dicotyledonous plants have following characteristics:
a. These plants range from small shrubs to very large trees.
b. They have a taproot system.
c. The stem is solid, strong, and mostly woody. Nodes are present at unequal intervals.
d. Vascular bundles are arranged in a ring-like form within the stem.
e. Reticulate venation is found in the leaf. The stem is petiolated and leaf is either simple or compound.
f. Seeds are enclosed within fruit. The seed consists of two cotyledons.

Soybean, mustard, pea, orange, mango, gram, beans, pumpkin, etc., belong to this class.

Activity 2.6
Classification of plants
Objectives: To classify plants
Materials required: Plants found in your locality, chart paper, glue
Method
Method
i. Collect small rooted plants from your locality.
ii. Collect leaves of larger plants.
iii. Observe the plants collected in student groups in the classroom.
iv. Comparethe roots, stems, and leaves of the collected plants and discuss in groups which plant falls into which division and class.
v. Draw the classification chart of plant kingdom on chart paper and paste the plants properly according to their group on chart paper.
vi. Now, paste the chart paper on the wall of the classroom.

Project work 2.1
Prepare herbarium by collecting various plants with their roots, stems, leaves, and flowers found in your locality.

2.2 Kingdom Animalia
Look at the picture of animals given below and discuss.
Sycon
Earthworm
Cockroach
Starfish
Fish
Pigeon
Cow
Figure 2.12

i. Which kingdom do these animals belong to?
ii. Do they have cell wall in their cells?
iii. Which animals have a vertebral column?
iv. What differences are found in starfish and fish?
v. What is the reason for placing all these animals in one kingdom?

All these animals have body made up of eukaryotic cells without cell walls. These animals are heterotrophs. Sycon, earthworms, cockroaches and starfishes have no vertebral column or backbone. But fish, pigeons, and cows have a vertebral column in their body. Various types of animals are found in this kingdom. These animals differ in their body structure, shape, forms, etc. Some animals possess an endoskeleton, while some animals' bodies are covered by hard exoskeletons.

Body structure is simple in some animals while all the systems are developed in the body of some animals. Some animals under this kingdom have no vertebral column in their body. They are called invertebrates. Animals having vertebral column are called vertebrates. According to the five kingdom system, among the animals in kingdom Animalia, the animals without a vertebral column are classified into eight phyla: Porifera, Coelenterata, Platyhelminthes, Nemathelminthes., Annelida, Arthropoda, Mollusca, and Echinodermata. Animals with a notochord and vertebral column are classified under the phylum Chordata. Hence, there are altogether nine phyla in the kingdom Animalia.
Porifera
Look at the pictures of animals given below and discuss:
Spongilla
Sycon
Euspongia
Figure 2.13

i. Where can these organisms be found?
ii. How can they perform nutrition and excretion?
iii. How do they move from one place to another place?
Spongilla, Sycon, and Euspongia in the figure are multicellular organisms. They are found in marine water (sea). They have pores in their body. Water enters and exits the body through these pores. So these animals are kept in phylum Porifera. These animals are also called poriferans or sponges. They are found attached on the substratum.

General characteristics of animals under this phylum are given below:
a. They are the first multicellular organisms.
b. Tissue is not developed in these organisms.
c. Their body develops from two germ layers in the embryonic stage and hence, they are called diploblastic animals.
d. They have pores in their body in which a larger pore is called osculum and smaller pores are called ostia. Water enters the body through ostia and exits through osculum which is called water canal system.
e. They respire through the general body surface.
f. Their adult forms are found attached to substratum.
g. They have high regeneration capacity. When their body splits accidentally into pieces, each piece give rise to a new individual.
h. They reproduce both asexually and sexually. Asexual reproduction takes place by budding and regeneration, and sexual reproduction takes place by the formation of gametes.
i. Their bodies are radially symmetrical in some forms i.e. body is divisible into equal halves by any one of many longitudinal planes. They are mostly asymmetrical.
Animals such as Sponge, Leucosolenia, Hylonema, Cliona, etc., are grouped under this phylum.

Coelenterata
Look at the pictures of animals given below and make discussions:
Hydra
Jellyfish
Coral
fig 2.14

i. What may be the function of appendages or outgrowths arising from the body of these animals?
ii. How do these animals obtain their food?
iii. What is the structure of the body of these animals?
The appendages or outgrowths arising from the body of Hydra, Coral, and Jellyfish shown in the picture are called tentacles. Tentacles help in feeding and movement. They have an internal hollow cavity in their body which is called coelenterons, and hence they are kept in the phylum coelenterata. General characteristics of the organisms under this phylum are given below:
a. Animals in this phylum are multicellular and diploblastic.
b. They are the first tissue graded animals. They have an empty vessel-like hollow cavity inside the body called coelenteron. Coelenteron is also called gastrovascular cavity since it performs the functions of both digestion and transportation.
c. They have a single opening of the alimentary canal, which is called the mouth. The mouth is surrounded by tentacles. Their feeding and locomotion take place by tentacles. Tentacles contain stinging cells or nematocysts which help to sting/kill and capture the prey.
d. They respire through the general body surface.
e. They reproduce both sexually and asexually. Asexual reproduction takes place by budding and regeneration method.
f. They are found in ponds, lakes, and seas.
g. Their bodies show radial symmetry.
Example: Hydra, Coral, Jellyfish, etc.

Platyhelminthes
Observe the picture given below. If possible, Search the internet about these anin1als and discuss the follov\ring questions:
Tapeworm
Liverfluke
Bloodfluke
Figure 2.15

i. What is the structure of the body of these animals?
ii. Do they have a developed organ system?
iii. Where are these organisms found?
iv. What is their mode of nutrition?
The body of animals such as tapeworms, liverflukes, blood flukes shown in the picture is like the tape or flat leaf. Animals belonging to this group are mostly parasites. They get shelter in the bodies of other animals. These animals are classified under the phylum platyhelminthes. 'Platy' means flat and 'helminthes' means worms. Their general characteristics are:
a. Shape of their body is flat leaf-like or long ribbon-like and hence they are called flatworms.
b. Their body is developed from three germ layers in the embryonic stage. So, they are triploblastic animals.
c. At the anterior and ventral surface of their body lies mouth, but these animals are without anus. The mouth is surrounded by hooks thathelp them to attach to the host.
d. A sucker is found around the mouth that helps to attach and absorb blood and nutrients from the host.
e. They do not have well-developed organ system.
f. The space between the body wall and internal organs is filled up with parenchyma tissue. It helps in transportation. There is no circulatory system.
g. They respire through their general body surface.
h. They have male and female reproductive organs in the same body, and hence they are called hermaphrodite or bisexual animals. Fertilization is internal.
i. They reproduce both sexually and asexually. Asexual reproduction takes place by fragmentation and regeneration.
j. They are mostly parasites and a few are free-living.
Examples: Liverfluke, Tapeworm, Diplozoon, Otoplana, Blood fluke, Planaria etc.

Nemathelminthes
Look at the picture given below and discuss the following questions:

Round worm
Hook worm
Pinworm
Figure 2.16

i. Have you ever had roundworm (Ascaris) in your abdomen?
ii. What is the structure of roundworm like?
iii. Where are hookworms and pinworms found?
iv. Do these animals harm the human body?
Ascaris, hookworms, and pinworms are parasites. They suck blood from humans and other animals. Their bodies are long, cylindrical and wormlike. They belong to Nemathelminthes. The characteristics of animals in this phylum are as follow:
a. Animals under this phylum have elongated and cylindrical body with tapering ends.
b. Their bodies can be divided into two equal halves which is called bilaterally symmetrical.
C. They are triploblastic.
d. They have a developed digestive system with mouth, anus, and sucker.
e. Their respiratory system and circulatory systems are absent.
f. They respire though their general body surface.
g. They are unisexual.
h. They reproduce by sexual methods only. Fertilization is internal.
i. They are mostly parasites. Few are free-living organisms. Parasites cause disease in the body of other animals.
Example: Ascaris, Hook worm, Pinworm, etc.

Annelida
Activity 2.7
Objective: To identify the characteristics of phylum Annelida
Materials required: Earthworm, needle, forceps
Method
i. Take an earthworm. Observe its structure thoroughly.
ii. Note its characteristics.
iii. For more information, search about earthworm in the internet and note the features.
iv. Draw a neat diagram of earthworm on chart paper.
v. Paste the chart paper on the board and discuss characteristics of earthworm.
vi. After the discussion, prepare a list of characteristics of phylum Annelida based on the study of earthworm.

Observe the picture of animals below and discuss their features.
Earthworm
Leech
Nereis
Figure 2.17

Animals such as earthworm, leech and Nereis are found in swampy or moist lands. Their bodies are elongated, cylindrical, and metamerically segmented. Earthworms are free-living and are found in moist soil. Leeches are ectoparasites, that are found in swamps. They suck blood from vertebrates. All these animals belong to the phylum Annelida. Characteristics of animals of this phylum are given below:

a. Their body is elongated, cylindrical and segmented both externally and internally.
b. The body is bilaterally symmetrical and triploblastic.
C. They have moist skin.
d. They respire through their outer body surface.
e. Excretion takes place through nephridia.
f. The circulatory system is well-developed. Hemoglobin is found in their blood.
g. The nervous system consists of a nerve ring and nerve cord with nerves.
h. The digestive system is well-developed.
i. Some of them are hermaphrodite and some are unisexual.
j. They have a high regeneration capacity.
k. They are found in moist lands, water, and some of them are ectoparasites.
Examples: earthworms, leeches, Nereis, etc.

Arthropoda
Look at the animals shown in figure or if possible, observe the specimens and discuss.
Butterfly
Crab
Prawn
Spider
Centipede
Figure 2.18

i. What are the similarities in the body structure of these animals?
ii. Where are these animals found?
iii. What is the outer covering of their body made up of?
iv. Why are these animals kept in phylum Arthropoda?
Butterflies fly from a flower to another with the help wings. Centipedes have many legs, prawns and crabs live in water. They have jointed legs. So, these animals belong to phylum arthropoda. This phylum is the largest one in the animal kingdom. Animals in this phylum have following characteristics:

a. Their body is externally covered by a hard covering called exoskeleton which is made up of chitin.
b. The body is bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic, and segmented.
C. Their body is divisible into the head, thorax, and abdomen. In some forms, the head and thorax are fused and called cephalothorax. The head bears a pair of compound eyes, paired antennae and mouth parts.
d. Legs are jointed and arising from thorах.
e. Generally, insects have two pairs of wings. But one pair of wings is present in some arthropods or sometimes wings are absent.
f. Male and female are separate. They perform sexual reproduction.
g. They breathe through their body surface, gills, or trachea. They are found in all types habitats like air water and land.
Examples: butterfly, bee, centipede, millipede, crab, spider, prawn, housefly, etc.

Mollusca
Look at the animals shown in figure or if possible, observe the specimens and discuss.
Slug
Snail
Cuttle fish
Octopus
fig 2.19

i. What is the function of the hard cover in the bodies of these animals?
ii. How do these animals sense the presence of an enemy and hide themselves inside the covering?
iii. How do they move?
iv. Can their body be divided into two equal halves?
Slug and snail are found in damp soil. Octopus and cuttlefish are found in marine water. They have tentacles in their head. Tentacles are sensory in function and are used to detect surrounding stimuli. They also have muscular feet which are used for locomotion. So, these animals are grouped under the phylum Mollusca.
Following are the characteristics of this phylum:
a. They are soft-bodied animals.
b. Their body is divided into head, visceral mass, muscular feet, and mantle.
C. Most of their body is covered with an exoskeleton made of calcium. They hide their body inside the hard exoskeleton when they touch an object.
d. The head bears tentacles and eyes.
e. Their body is asymmetrical which means body cannot be divided into equal halves by any means.
f. Muscular feet help in swimming in water or gliding on the surface.
g. They respire through the body surface, gills or pulmonary sac.
h. The digestive system, circulatory system, and nervous system are developed.
i. They are usually unisexual, but few are hermaphrodite or bisexual.
They are found in both land and water. Examples: slug, snail, octopus, cuttlefish, unio, etc.

Echinodermata
Starfish
Sea cucumber
Sea urchin
Figure 2.20

Animals shown in the picture are spiny skinned. They belong to the phylum Echinodermata. Following are the characteristics of animals under this phylum:
a. Their body is externally covered by hard calcareous (made of calcium carbonate) spines.
b. Animals are of various shapes like globular, star-like, elongated and spherical.
c. They do not have distinct head.
d. They are triploblastic and radially symmetrical animals.
e. They move with the help of tube feet.
f. The digestive system is developed.
g. They respire through gills.
h. They are unisexual.
i. These animals reproduce sexually.
j. Regeneration is common in them.
k. All the animals in this phylum are found in marine water or sea water.
Example: Starfish, Sea urchin, Sea cucumber, etc.

Project work 2.2 Collection and classification of animals
With the help of your teacher, form groups of students and collect small animals found around your school. Adopt precautions while collecting the animals. Follow the teacher's instructions. Carefully observe the collected animals. Classify them on the basis of external feature into different phyla. Prepare a report on it and present in the class room.

Phylum: Chordata
This phylum consists of the most advanced animals of animal kingdom. All animals bearing a notochord are classified in the Chordata phylum. Animals belonging to this phylum have the following characteristics:
a. They have a developed, elastic, rod-like notochord between the nerve cord and alimentary canal at any stage of life.
b. Paired lateral gill openings are situated on both sides of pharynx in the embryonic stage.
c. A hollow, tubular nervous tissue is found in the vertebral canal.
d. The skeleton is covered with muscles.
e. They have a closed circulatory system.
Phylum Chordata is divided into four sub-phyla. They are Hemichordata, Urochordata, Cephalochordata, and Vertebrata. The first three subphyla are collectively called Protochordata since animals belonging to these subphyla are more primitive than the animals in Vertebrata. Here, we are going to discuss sub-phylum Vertebrata only.

Sub-phylum vertebrata
Frog
Fish
Snake
Pigeon
Tiger
Figure 2.21

All the animals shown in picture have backbone or vertebral column. Animals having vertebral column are called vertebrates. Notochord developed in the embryonic stage of these animals is later replaced by vertebral column.
Fish, frog, snake, pigeon, whale, Bat, etc. are under the subphylum vertebrata. They have mostly similar features, however very few features are not common. Animals belonging to this sub-phylum have the following features:
a. Their body is bilaterally symmetrical.
b. The respiration takes place through gills or moist skin or lungs.
c. The body temperature of some animals which are called poikilothermic or cold blooded animals, changes according to the surrounding environment.
d. The body temperature of some animals which are called homeothermic or warm blooded animals does not change according to the surrounding environment. They maintain their body temperature slightly higher than that of environment.
e. They have well developed circulatory system. Number of heart chambers range from two to four.
f. Some animals called oviparous give birth to their young ones by laying eggs while some animals called viviparous directly give birth to their young ones.
Based on their physical structure and development, animals in sub-phylum vertebrata are divided into five classes: pisces, amphibian, reptilia, aves, and mammalia.

Pisces
Activity 2.8: Observation of the fish
Objective: To identify the characteristics of Pisces
Materials required: fish, chart paper
Method
i. Take a fish.
ii. Observe its structure in detail.
iii. With the help of your teacher, identify it's all organs.
iv. Note its characteristics based on your observation.
V. Draw a neat and labelled diagram of fish on chart paper.
vi. On the basis of the study of fish, discuss the characteristics of pisces.

Sea horse
Fish
Shark
Figure 2.22

Animals shown in the picture belong to the class pisces. General characteristics of these animals are given follow:
a. Their body is elongated, flat, and streamlined. Their bodies are covered by scales.
b. Their body is divisible into head, trunk, and tail. The neck is absent.
C. Gills are found on the lateral side of head. They help in respiration.
d. They have paired and unpaired fins for locomotion.
e. They have air sacs in their body.
f. Their heart is two-chambered.
g. These animals are poikilothermic.
h. They are unisexual animals.
i. They are mostly oviparous but few are viviparous.
j. Most fishes perform external fertilization but internal fertilization is found in some fishes like sharks.
i. They live in water. All fishes, sea horse, etc. belong to this class.

Amphibia
Activity 2.9
Observation of the frog
Objective: To identify the characteristics of amphibians
Material: Frog
Method
i. Take a frog.
ii. Observe its external structure thoroughly.
iii. With the help of the teacher, identify it's all organs.
iv. Note its characteristics based on your observation.
v. On the basis of observation of the frog, discuss the characteristics of amphibia.

Conclusion
Toad
Frog
Salamander
Fig.2.23
Toads, salamanders, and frogs live on land and water both. They belong to the class Amphibia. The characteristics of animals in this class are given below:
a. Their body is covered by moist skin.
b. Their body is divided into head and trunk. Tail is found in some amphibians.
c. They have two pairs of limbs.
d. They are poikilothermic.
e. Their young ones are tadpoles that respire through gills. Adult forms respire through lungs and moist skin.
f. They have a three-chambered heart.
g. They are unisexual.
h. These are oviparous and lay eggs in water. Fertilization is external.
i. They need water for reproduction. Examples: frogs, toads, and salamanders, etc.

Reptilia
Snake
Lizard
Crocodile
Tortoise
Figure 2.24
Animals such as snake, lizard, crocodile, tortoise, etc. crawl on the ground. So they are grouped in the class reptilia. Animals in this class have following characteristics:
a. Their bodies are covered with dry and horny scales.
b. Their bodies are divided into four parts: head, neck, trunk, and tail.
C. They have two pairs of limbs which crawl on the ground for locomotion.
d. These animals are poikilothermic.
e. They respire through lungs.
f. They have a three-chambered heart. But crocodiles have a four-chambered heart.
g. They are unisexual. Fertilization is internal and they are oviparous.
h. They are mostly found on land although some of them live in both land and water. The aquatic ones come to the surface of water for respiration.
Example: snake, garden-lizard, wall-lizard, crocodile, tortoise, etc.

Aves
Duck
Lophophorus
Parrot
Hen
Peacock
Figure 2.25

Fore limbs are modified into wings in parrot, lophophorus, peacock, duck, hen, etc. They have a beak. Their bodies are covered with feathers. So, these animals are grouped under the class aves. Their general features are given below:
i. Their body is covered with feathers.
ii. Body is divisible into head, neck, trunk, and tail.
iii. They have two pairs of limbs in which the forelimb is modified into wings and the hind limbs are used for walking.
iv. They have hollow pneumatic bones in their bodies which make their bodies lighter for flying.
V. These animals are homoeothermic.
vi. They breathe through lungs.
vii. They have a four-chambered heart.
viii. They are unisexual. Fertilization is internal and they are oviparous.
ix. These animals have air sacs inside their bodies. They live on land, and they can fly. Example: parrot, lophophorus, peacock, duck, hen, etc.

Mammalia
Whale
bat
rat
Lion
Figure 2.26
Animals shown in the picture such as rat, bat, lion etc., have body covered with hair. They give birth directly to young ones and suckle milk to their babies. All of them belong to the class mammalia. Animals under this class have following characteristics:
a. Their body is covered with hair.
b. Generally, their body is divided into head, neck, trunk, and tail.
c. They have developed mammary glands.
d. They breathe through lungs.
e. These are homeothermic.
f. They have a four-chambered heart.
g. They are unisexual. Fertilization is internal. They are viviparous.
Human, horse, whale, cow, etc., belong to this class.

Activity 2.10: Study of museum specimen of animals
Objective: To classify and identify the characteristics of animals
Material required: Specimens of animals in the science laboratory
Method
i. Observe various animal specimen in the science laboratory.
ii. Study their features.
iii. Classify these animals on the basis of their features.
iv. Prepare an animal classification chart on a chart paper. Fill in the chart with the name of the animals you observed.
Fig. 2.27 Evolution of organism and classification

Relation of classification of living beings and evolution
Look at the given picture and discuss the following questions.

Relation of classification of living beings and evolution
Look at the given picture and discuss the following questions.
Animalia
Plantae
Fungi
Monera
PROTISTA
MONERA
Protista
Figure 2.28 Classification of living being

i. Which organisms do you think evolved earlier among the organisms under the protists and the organisms under the monerans?
ii. The five kingdoms are shown in the tree diagram. Discus the relationship between the evolution and classification of living beings based on the given diagram.
When we study the basis of five kingdom classification, some kingdoms have many common features but a few of them have less common features. It indicates that all livings beings have a common ancestry. Here, the common characteristics of all living beings is that their body is developed from a living cell.

Classification of living beings shows that prokaryotic organisms evolved first on the Earth, which are now in the kingdom Monera. Then, eukaryotic organisms evolved slowly, which are now in the Protista kingdom. During the course of evolution, other multicellular organisms like fungi, plants, and animals developed gradually.
Classification of living beings and evolution are separate disciplines of biology. Classification of living beings is the process of grouping them on the basis of their similarities and differences. Similarly, evolution is the process of gradual change of living beings from a simpler to a more complex form. Those animals which have many common features are kept in the same group in the classification of living beings. When we compare the animals of class Mammalia and Aves, they have a few common features. When we compare the animals of class Mammalia and Pisces, they have very few common features. It indicates that animals belonging to mammals under went speciation from the same ancestor some years ago.

When we observe the animals within group vertebrata, pisces have two-chambered heart. Reptiles have three-chambered heart but aves and mammals have a four-chambered heart. It also indicates that advanced animals developed from less developed animals. Classification of living beings is possible because of such differences in the organisms.
What we know from the common features in pisces, aves and mammals is that the organisms belonging to these three classes evolved from the same ancestor many years ago. During the course of evolution, they developed new characteristics and, in this way, new organisms were formed. Here, aves arecloser to mammalia than pisces. This means thataves and mammals appear to have diverged from a common ancestor only a few years earlier than pisces. Common features of pisces, mammalia and aves indicate that they were developed from a distant common ancestor. In this way, if we study the characteristics of various phyla in the animal kingdom, we can find some similarities among them. It proves that all the organisms of the animal kingdom have common ancestry. In course of evolution, they advanced into various new forms.

Project work 2.3 Study the relationship between classification of living beings and evolution
Take a classification chart of living beings. Study the basis of classification in detail. Discuss with your friends the characteristics of animals of different groups in the chart. Identify their similarities and differences. Take the help of teacher and internet, if required. Based on your findings, prepare a short report on the relation between classification of living beings and evolution. If possible, prepare a powerpoint presentation of the report and present it to the class.

Exercise

1. Choose the correct options for the questions below.
a. What are the main features of organisms under kingdom plantae?
i. Eukaryotic cell, cell with cell wall, heterotrophs
ii. Eukaryotic cell, cell without cell wall, heterotrophs
iii. Eukaryotic cell, cell with cell wall, autotrophs
iv. Eukaryotic cell, cell with cell wall, saprotrophs
b. Why is Cycas kept in gymnosperm?
i. Bears flowers, produces seed.
ii. Bears flowers, leaves are needle-like.
iii. Bears cones instead of flowers, seeds are naked without fruit.
iv. Bears cones instead of flowers, seedsare enclosed in fruit.
c. Two animals are shown here in figure. They belong to the same kingdom. Look at the figure and write the main reason for grouping them under the same kingdom.
Schistosoma, green frog
i. Multicellular and have various organ systems
ii. Multicellular and heterotrophic
iii. Multicellular and parasitic
iv. Multicellular and oviparous
d. Based on evolution, which of the following groups of organisms are closely related?
i. Porifera, Annelida, Chordata
ii. Porifera, Arthropoda, Chordata
iii. Coelenterata, Arthropoda, Chordata
iv. Platyhelminthes, Nemathelminthes, Annelida
e. What is the main reason for classifying whales in the class mammalia?
i. Respires through lungs
ii. Vertebral column is found in the body
iii. Viviparous
iv. Gives birth and suckle milk to young ones
f. Why are club mosses more advanced than the mosses?
i. Clubmoss grows on the land.
ii. Clubmoss is sporophyte.
iii. Xylem and phloem tissue are found in clubmoss.
iv. Sporophyte is dominant in alternation of generation.
g. To which kingdom do organisms having cell walls belong?
i. monera, fungi, animalia
ii. fungi, plantae, protista
iii. fungi, plantae, animalia
iv. fungi, plantae, monera
h. To which class do egg-laying animals with a four-chambered heart and body covered with feather belong?
i. Mammalia
ii. Reptilia
iii. Aves
iv. Amphibia
I. Which of the following group of plants belong to angiosperm?
i. pinus, fern, pea
ii. juniper, maize, gram
iii. moss, maize, bean
iv. paddy, banana, mango
j. Which division do the plants having vascular tissue belong to?
i. Sporophyta
ii. Gametophyta
iii. Tracheophyta
iv. Spermatophyta

2. Differentiate:
a. Plant kingdom and animal kingdom
b. Fish and star fish
C. Jelly fish and cuttle fish
d. Moss and club moss
e. Pinus and peepal
f. Fish and whale
g. Dove and Bat

3. Give reason:
a. Living beings need to be classified.
b. Fucus and Marchantia look alike, but Fucus is classified as algae while Marchantia is classified as bryophyta.
c. Gymnosperms do not bear fruit.
d. Although a crocodile has a four-chambered heart, it belongs to the reptilian class.
e. Although bats and whales have dissimilar characteristics, they belong to the same class.
f. Riccia is an amphibian plant.
g. Fern is not a flowering plant; Cycas bears flower like cone but no fruit; banana bears flower and fruit. However, all these plants are kept in the same division.

4. Answer the following questions.
a. Into how many divisions are the organisms in plant kingdom divided?
b. Write the main features of kingdom plantae.
c. Write the similarities of plants which belong to gymnosperm and angiosperm.
d. If you are given only the leaves of some plants in tracheophyta and asked to distinguish their subdivisions using the taxonomic knowledge you have acquired in class. Is it possible to do so? Give your arguments.
e. What are the main characteristics of pteridophyta?
Roshni observed only the flowers of new plant in her garden and concluded that the plant belongs to monocotyledon. Is observation of only the flowers a right way to identify monocotyledon? Give reasons. 
f. Roshni observed only the flowers of new plant in her garden and concluded that the plant belongs to monocotyledon. Is observation of only the flowers a right way to identify monocotyledon? Give reasons.
g. Two plants are shown in the picture. Observe both pictures and answer the following questions:
Cycas rumphii, Orange
i. Compare and write their similarities and differences.
ii. Mention their subdivisions. Also write the reason for placing them in these subdivisions.
iii. Which one of them is more advanced? Clarify with reasons.
h. Following chart shows the group of four animals. In which group does fish belong to?
terestrial
aquatic
invertebrates
A
B
vertebrates
C
D
i. Digestive system is not developed in the animals of phylum porifera. How do they digest food? Write.
j. Rakesh saw an animal while he was playing in the ground. How can he identify the phylum of that animal by using taxonomic knowledge of kingdom Animalia? Explain.
k. Shark and whale both live in water. Based on their features, which is more developed animal? Explain with reasons.
Pictures of two animals are shown below, compare them and answer the following questions:
Bat, Eagle
i. In which phylum and class do they belong?
ii. Write any two similarities and dissimilarities between them.
iii. How does the study of these animals clarify the concept of evolution?
m. Explain the relation between classification of living beings and evolution.
n. Draw a chart to show classification of kingdom plantae according to five kingdom system.
o. Draw a chart to show classification of kingdom animalia according to five kingdom system.
p. Look at the picture below and answer the following questions:
Fish, Snake, Pigeon, Tiger, Frog
i. Which animal has a two-chambered heart?
ii. Which animal suckles milk to its young?
iii. Write any two similarities between frogs and snakes.
iv. Which of these animals have air sacs in their bodies?






Honey Bee

Observe the picture given below and discuss:
Figure 3.1 Bee hive

i. What type of hive is shown in the picture?
ii. Should humans make hives for bees?
iii. What type of animal is a bee?
Let's study the event
Sanumaya was watering the flowers in her garden. At that time, her attention was drawn to the buzzing sound of some insects. She began to look carefully to see why those insects had been buzzing. Then, she noticed that those insects were honey bees. They were flying and sucking nectar from flowers. Sanumaya looked the bees attentively for some time. She saw that the bees were sitting on flowers for a while before flying away. She tried to find out where they were going, and after following, She saw the bees were sitting in a hive made in a nearby tree. Although from a little distance, she also observed the hive and saw various types of bees there.
Have you ever seen a beehive in your home or locality? Based on your experience or the aforementioned event, discuss the following questions:
i. What do honeybees feed on to survive?
ii. Are all the bees of same type in a beehive?
iii. What lessons can be learned from bees?
iv. Do bees help humans only by producing honey, or do they help in other ways too?
A bee is an insect that lives freely in a special type of hive that has made for itself. It belongs to the phylum Arthropoda. While farming honeybees, farmers construct artificial hives for them. Honey bees are social insects living in large colony. There are three types of honey bees called queen, worker, and drone, living in a hive. There is a high level of understanding and discipline among the members of the bee colony. A high degree of division of labor is also found among them. Every member of the bee colony is very disciplined and hardworking, and they keep themselves busy all the time. Honeybees collect pollen and nectar to make honey.
Human beings have been adopting traditional methods of farming bees since ancient times. Since the 20th century, beekeeping has been done not only for the production of honey but also for pollination and for producing wax. Nowadays, modern hives are used for beekeeping as an agricultural business, from which more honey can be produced. Commercial rearing of bees is called apiculture. A separate study of bees is done for farming bees from a business point of view. The science that studies bees is called melittology or apicology which is a branch of entomology (the science of insects).

Activity 3.1 Observation and study of the bee
Objective:  Study the physical structure of the bee
Material required: If possible, all types of bees, if not, a video or picture showing the external structure of all bees.
Method
i. Make three groups of students in the classroom.
ii. Take a picture of a bee or watch a video and study its body structure.
iii. Now draw a neat diagram of the bee you observed and note its characteristics.
iv. Present and discuss the findings of each group turn by turn.
Conclusion: Conclude the structure of honey bee based on discussion.
Queen bee
Drone bee
Worker bee
Figure 3.2 Types of bee
Generally, the size of a bee ranges from 9 mm to 20 mm in length. Like other insects, their body is divided into head, thorax, and abdomen. They have paired compound eyes, paired antennae and mouth parts in their head. They detect surroundings stimuli by the help of antennae. Compound eyes can see without rotating the head. Thorax consists of three segments. From each segment arise a pair of legs. Legs are jointed, so they are kept in the phylum Arthropoda. The first two segments of the thorax give rise to a pair of wings which help them to fly a far distance. The abdomen consists of 9 segments, but 6 segments are prominent in adult females and 7 segments in adult males.
In a hive, three types of bees are present: queen bee, drone bee and worker bee. Each member has their own characteristics, which is studied here:

Queen bee
The queen bee is the largest sized and elongated bee in the beehive. Its head is smaller and rounded than others. Its proboscis is short and covered with hairs. Sting is present at the end of abdomen. Generally, there is only one queen in the hive. Its main function is to lay eggs. It controls activities of all bees in the hive according to the situation. Its body produces a special scented substance called pheromone. With the help of this, it attracts males for mating. Similarly, pheromones are also used for the communication and to find out the location of hive. A queen bee lives the longest in the hive, about 2-5 years. Worker bees form a new queen by feeding royal jelly to the larva.

Drone bee
The drone bee is smaller than the queen but larger, blackish and hairy than the worker bee. It does not have sting, pollen basket, and wax-producing glands. It is the laziest bee in the hive. It is even fed by worker bees. Its function is to fertilizethe queen bee. Drones are haploid. They have only 16 chromosomes, but the queen and worker are diploid, having 32 chromosomes. Drones are developed from unfertilized eggs. This process is called parthenogenesis. They only survive for about two months.

Worker bee
They are the smallest size bee in the hive. They have a special body structure. Mouthparts are chewing and lapping type. Worker bees are extremely hardworking. Their legs are densely covered with hair. Legs also possess pollen baskets. They collect pollen in the pollen basket and transport to the hive. The function of worker bees includes collecting nectar, constructing the hive, nursing young ones protecting the hive, etc. About 20,000-80,000 worker bees can be found in a hive. Life span of worker bees is about 6 weeks to 6 months.

Question to think: Why do bee stings cause swelling?

Life cycle of honey bee
Activity 3.2 Observation and study of the life cycle of the honey bee
Materials required: Video or picture showing life cycle of the honey
bee, clay, metacard, etc.
Method
i. Divide the class into four groups.
ii. Watch the video of honey bee.
iii. Study thoroughly and each group discuss one of the stages (egg, larva, pupa and adult) of life cycle of bee. Draw a picture on the metacard and note the characteristics. Also prepare a model of the life cycle of the honey bee using clay.
iv. Paste the metacard and model prepared by each group on the board in sequential order. Present and discuss each stage in turn.
Conclusion: Conclude the discussion on life cycle of the honey bee based on the presentation.
All bees complete their life cycle in four stages egg, larva, pupa, and adult. The duration of these stages varies according to the types of bees. To complete the life cycle, there occur two events- histolysis (degeneration of old tissues) and histogenesis (the formation of new tissues) in the larva and pupa. Because of these events, there is transformation of egg into larva, larva into pupa, and pupa into adult. This process is called complete metamorphosis.
When there is an excess number of worker bees in a hive, the queen bee forms a new colony with a number of worker bees and eventually leaves the hive. Worker bees construct new hive. The worker bees in the old hive prepare a new queen by feeding a larva developed from a fertilized egg only with royal jelly. When the queen bee becomes adult, she leaves for the nuptial flight or mating flight. Usually, the queen bee leaves for the mating flight in the evening. When the queen bee leaves hive then she is followed by a group of drones. Queen bee mates with many drones. After mating, drones die. Queen bees receive sperms from drones which are used to fertilize millions of eggs. The structures used to store sperm in the body of the queen are called spermathecae. Drones die after mating because their genital organs are forcibly pulled during mating. After 2-3 days of mating, the queen bee starts laying eggs in the brood cell.
Figure 3.3 Life cycle of honey bee
egg
larva
pupa
adult

Egg
The eggs of honey bee are white and elongated. Each egg lies erect within the brood cell on the first day, slanted on the second day. and horizontal on the third day. The queen bee lays eggs in drone cells to make drones. queen cells to make queens and worker cells to make workers. She can lay eggs up to 3,000 per day under favourable conditions. The number of eggs varies with the types of bees. The duration of an egg for all bees is three days. The size of an egg ranges from 1 mm to 1.5 mm. There are two types of eggs: fertilized and unfertilized. From fertilized eggs develop queen and worker bees. Drones develop from unfertilized eggs.
Larva
After three days of laying eggs, the eggs hatch into larvae. The larval stage lasts for about 5.5 days for queens, about 6 days for workers,and about 7 days for drones. The larva actively feeds in this stage. The larvae of future queens and drones are larger than the larvae of future workers. Queen and worker bees are both females developed from fertilized eggs. Whether a larva will be developed into a queen bee or a worker bee depends upon the type of food fed to the larvae. All larvae are fed royal jelly for three days. After that, the food type is changed according to the types of bee. The larvae that will become queen bees in the future continuously feed on nutritious royal jelly, but the larvae of future workers and drones feed on beebread after three days. Honey bread or bee bread is the mixture of honey and pollen. The larva moults for five times. As the food fed to the larvae is different, the duration of their developmental stage is also different.
Pupa
The pupa is an inactive phase in the life cycle of the bee in which it does not feed or move, but its structural changes are going on. In this phase, three pairs of legs, wings, and mouthparts are developed. The pupal stage lasts for 8 days, 12 days and 14 days for the queen, the worker, and the drone respectively.
Adult
After many changes, the pupa is transformed into an adult. The mandibles in the mouth of the newly formed adult bee chew the layer of wax sealed to the brood cell and emerge out. After they emerge, worker bees start helping others immediately. They have important tasks in the hive, such ascaring for brood cell, feeding larvae, and protecting the hive.
egg
larva 6 day
larva 10 day
pupa 15 day
pupa 18 day
adult 21 day
Figure 3.4 Various stages of bees
Generally, it takes different time period to reach adulthood from an egg. This is given in the following table.
Bee
Egg
Larva
Pupa
Total
Queen bee
3
5.5
7.5
16 day
Worker bee
3
6
12
21 day
drone
3
7
14
24 day


Newly born worker bees work within the hive for about three weeks. Then, the workers are assigned to work outside the hive. Work division of the bee according to their types and age:
S.N.
Type
Age
1.
function
Drone
Throughout the life
Fertilize queen bee and make hive warm.
2.
Queen bee
life Throughout the
Lays eggs and regulates the activities of hive by secret-ing pheromones.
3.
Worker
1-3 day
Clean the hive and cling to the honey comb to provide warmth to egg larva and pupa
4-6 days
Feed honey bread to larvae.
7-11 days
Royal gland is developed in their head to produce royal jelly which is fed to larva and queen.
12-17 days
Four pair of wax glands are developed in their body. used for making honey comband to seal larval cell and honey cell.
18-20 days
Sting glands are developed to protect hive.
After 21 days
Collect nectar, pollen. water, etc.

Let us know
Honey production
Like royal jelly, honey is not produced from a particular gland in the body of a bee. Honey is a combination of monosaccharide sugars, especially fructose and glucose, which is prepared by evaporating as much water as possible from a mixture of different types of flower juice or nectar with the help of natural wind and the wind that blows when the worker bees flap their wings. It is composed of 80-85% carbohydrates, 15-17% water, 0.3% protein, 0.2% amino acids, vitamins, and other constituents. The colour, smell, and effectiveness of honey depend on the type of flowers from which the nectar is collected.
Use of honey bee
Honey bees are beneficial insects for the ecosystem, including human beings. Their benefits can be mentioned in the following points:
a. Human beings are encouraged in various social behaviors by the hardworking nature, division of work, and high level of disciple among honey bees.
b. Highly nutritious honey is produced by bees, which is used in Ayurvedic medicine, candy, cake, bread, etc.
c. While sucking nectar from flowers, pollination is carried out in plants. So honey bees have a role in the production of more crops in agriculture.
d. Beeswax is widely used in cosmetics; for the manufacture of cream, lipstick, candles, etc.
e. Beekeepers can earn a large sum of money if they get knowledge on extraction of royal jelly from the bees.
f. Farmers can earn a lot of money from apiculture which can promote the economy of a nation.

Project work: Visit the beekeeping area
Visit the bee keeping area near the school, observe, and inquire about the structure of bees, the life cycle of bees, bee farming, and its importance. Based on this, prepare a short report and discuss it in the class.

Exercise

1. Choose the correct options for the questions below.
a. \IVhich bee contains only 16 chromosomes?
1. Queen bee	11.	Worker bee
111.	Drone bee	1v.	Queen and worker bee
b. From where is royal jelly produced?
1. from the gland at the head of queen bee
11.	fro111 the gland at the head of drone
111.	from the gland at the head of worker bee 1v.	fron1 the salivary gland of worker
c. Which bee is formed when the larva is fed royal jelly continuously?

1. Choose the correct options for the questions below.
a. Which bee contains only 16 chromosomes?
i. Queen bee
ii. Worker bee
iii. Drone bee
iv. Queen and worker bee
b. From where is royal jelly produced?
i. from the gland at the head of queen bee
ii. from the gland at the head of drone
iii. from the gland at the head of worker bee
iv. from the salivary gland of worker
d. Which bee is formed when the larva is fed royal jelly continuously?
i. queen
ii. drone
iii. workers
iv. queen and worker bee
d. Which stage of the bee is shown in the given diagram?
Fig: Pupa
i. egg
ii. larva
iii. pupa
iv. adult
e. Why is honey bee called a social insect?
i. It produces honey.
ii. It helps in pollination in plants.
iii. It lives in colony
iv. It is domesticated insect.
f. When the pollen baskets in the legs of worker bees are broken by certain means, which of the following functions cannot be performedby them?
i. collecting nectar
ii. constructing brood cell
iii. feeding royal jelly tolarva
iv. collecting pollen from flower
g. Which of the following is the characteristic of the drone bee?
i. haploid, sterile, medium sized, hairy
ii. haploid, fertile, medium sized, hairy
iii. diploid, sterile, medium sized, smooth
iv. diploid, fertile, medium sized, hairy
h. Where does the queen bee store the sperms received from the drone bee after the nuptial flight?
i. pollen sac
ii. ovary
iii. sperm sac
iv. egg sac

2. Differentiate:
a. Drone and worker bee
b. Queen bee and worker bee
c. Queen bee and drone
3. Give reason:
a. Honey bee is called social insect.
b. Pasture land is required for bee farming.
c. Drone dies after mating.
d. Bees are multipurpose insects.

4. Answer the following questions:
a. Write the various types of bee found in the hive.
b. What is the function of the drone bee?
c. If the queen bee dies for some reason, who will control the hive?
d. How does the queen bee control other members of the hive?
e. Write the uses of honey.
f. Describe the structure of the queen bee.
8. Mention the functions of the worker bee.
h. Explain how the division of labour occurs in bees.
i. Explain the life cycle ofhoney bee with diagram.
j. What is the process called in which a drone is developed froman unfertilized egg?
k. When a farmer practises bee farming, then income of other farmers in that locality also increases. Justify your reason.
l. Due to the problem of pasture land in the beekeeping area, beekeepers shifted the bees from there. After that, there was areduction in the yield of mustard crops of nearby farmers. Based on this, explain the relationship between beekeeping and agricultural production.
m. Look at the concept map and complete it.
??--> Photosynthesis <-- Bee --> Fertilization --> 1. Fertile(??) and 2. ??